- [Instructor] Now, let's talk about event
and event listeners.
Let's first understand what are events
in Java Enterprise Edition.
They're basically notifications for a change
in the state of certain objects.
Now, when we say the state of certain objects,
it means, a lot of things, let's see what that is.
The occur at following levels.
One is; if there's a change in the ServletContext object
which is at the application level and then there's a change
in the HTTPSession object which is at the session level,
this is the one that we used for session management,
and if there's a change in HTTPServletRequest object,
which is at the request level.
So when we say that there's a change in the state
of these objects, what do we mean by that?
It means that, there's a change in either the life cycle
or the information that you may be added or removed
or replaced from these objects.
So it could mean either of them.
Now, when can events occur?
Let's see all the categories of events that can occur
in a Java Enterprise application.
Let's say you deploy and you undeploy your application,
so that's at the context level, at the application level,
so, those are the points where events could occur
in your application.
The other thing is, when you create a session,
when the user logs in,
let's say, if you've always set up a session
when the user logs out, you invalidate a session,
so those also are the appropriate points
where events can get triggered for your app.
Let's say the client hit a request
and it finally entered your Servlet
and the request processing started, that also
is going to be an event for the application.
Then of course in the Servlet context
or you have the session or you have the request,
if you add an attribute or remove an attribute,
that also could be the place where you have events
being triggered.
Session migration,
so this typically happens in a distributed environment
or wherever you have set load balancing.
So, let's say there are two machines
on which the application is deployed.
The first few requests come to the first machine
and then the next few requests go to the other one,
so you may need to move the session
from one machine to another and that's where,
you could have these events generated for session migration.
Then we often have this requirement
where we store a lot of information in the session
as attributes and those attributes could be objects.
So let's say an object is binding itself to a session,
unbinding itself from the session,
so those are also the points
where you could have events triggered for your app.
So then, what are event listeners in JEE?
Let's understand that now.
Now that we know what are events, event listeners
are basically classes, that can be written
in order to respond to those events.
You can trap those events, you can capture them
and then you can perform the logic that is necessary
for your application.
When you talk about listeners,
listener classes can be created by inheriting
the appropriate interface or interfaces
from either the java extract servlet package
or java extract servlet.http package.
Listeners are also going to be crucial
because they help you a lot
for efficient resource management
and automated task processing.
Let's think about a scenario.
We all know that managing database connection
is always a very critical factor in any application.
If you look at our application,
we've always been setting up the database connection
in the Dao class.
And the Dao class's APIs are only going to get called
when a request comes in from the user.
So when a request comes in, it first comes to the Servlet
and then from the Servlet, we traverse to the Dao,
and then the Dao is going to setup the connection for us.
But now think of this scenario.
Let's say a request came in, and it entered the servlet.
From the servlet we call the Dao.
Now when we were trying to setup the connection in Dao,
let's say the database server is down.
If that is the case you will never be able to setup
a connection and then the entire cycle of that request
is going to fail and it will be an embarrassing
situation for the application..
Instead of this, can we do something like,
we could actually setup the database connection right
at the point where we are deploying our application.
So even let's say when we are deploying our application
and the database server is down,
we can just shutdown the application so that no user
can access it.
That will be a way better situation than the one
where you have got a request already and then the server
is down and you're not able to do anything.
So that way listeners help you to do efficient
resource management and they will also help you to
automate certain tasks for your application.
Now let's understand what is the use case scenario that
we are going to implement for listeners as a part
of our H plus port application.
So far in all our previous flows, we have a servlet
and then we go to Dao,
and as I said, we setup the connection
there which then finally talks to the database.
Now what we're going to do is we're going to do this
entire job of setting up the database connection
inside our listener class and we're going to pickup that
listener class which is going to get executed when
your application gets deployed or undeployed.
Okay.
So now, when you will implement the listener,
the flow will be like this.
The listener at the deployment time itself is going to
get executed and it'll setup the db connection
object for you.
Now whenever a request comes in from the user,
any of your servlets can retrieve the connection
which was setup by the listener and pass it to the Dao
and subsequently the Dao will talk to the database
and give you the data or basically a database transaction.
We will look at that in the next video.